Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Manveer Singh. This is
our 3rd time together. She is an assistant professor
of anthropology at the University of California Davis. I
will be leaving links to our first two interviews
in the description, and we're going to talk today
about his A book, Shamanism, the Timeless Religion. So
Doctor Singh, welcome back to the show. It's always
a pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, thanks for having me, Ricardo. Always, always a
pleasure to be on.
So let's start perhaps with the most basic question
here, what is shamanism?
Yeah, so it's a basic question. It's also a
highly debated question. So the way that I define
it in the book, um, which follows some other
scholars, is a practice in which a specialist enters
a non-ordinary state, also called trans, sometimes called ecstasy,
and Thinking about all of those similarly, just non-ordinary
behavior, non-ordinary state to engage with unseen realities, often
unseen agents and provide services like healing and divination.
So I think those three features for my definition
at least are critical. The altered states, the unseen
realities are unseen agents, and the healing divination or
other services.
And how will the shamanism in human societies do
we have a good idea of that?
I mean, that is also a very debated question.
So in the book, I argue that it is
very old, that it's probably as old as um
cognitive modernity or behavioral behavioral modernity. So as long
as we have been behaviorally and cognitively recognizably human,
I argue that we've probably had shamanism, um. But
it's hard to get. Of course, archaeological evidence or
other evidence, the farther back you go.
Mhm. And what kinds of evidence can we draw
from when trying to determine whether shamanism was present
in prehistoric societies?
Yeah, so I would say there are a couple
different strategies or a couple different domains of evidence.
One is Um, essentially evidence from the past. So
some people will point to burials, they will point
to rock art, they will point to, um, you
know, headgear that is found in archaeological contexts. Um,
THESE are all interesting, and they are helpful to
some degree, but they're also very hard to interpret.
So some people are very eager to interpret particular
finds as evidence of shamanism or evidence of buried
shamans, you know, it might be a woman who
is deformed, who um is buried with all kinds
of uh animal bones and is buried in a
very particular way and people, you know, there are
a couple of examples like this where people have
called those buried shamans, but Um, it's, it's actually
very hard to confirm that. It's very easy to
fall into this kind of interpretive gymnastics where you
want to see something and but it's actually open
to many more interpretations, and something goes similarly for
rock art. Um, SO there's some rock art that
people have argued was produced by shamans in these
trans states, other rock art people will argue actually
depicts shamans, but that is again very open to
interpretation, open to debate. So that's one way of
making this claim, but another way, um, so there
are two other related ways. One is to actually
look at shamanism among contemporary societies. So, shamanism is
ubiquitous. It's found almost among almost all hunter gatherer
societies. And so, on that basis, we can infer
that it was likely present among our ancestors. Um,
AND we can infer that there are two forms
of infants you can make there. One is, um,
Like, uh, Insofar as human societies today have have
shamanism, then um it seems that there is something
about our minds, our cultures that uh predisposes shamanism
to emerge. Uh, OTHER people will say that look
at shamanism around the world, you see it everywhere,
that means that some common cultural ancestor had shamans
that, you know, some African Edenic population had shamanism
and then it diffused to all of them, um.
Now, I disagree with this, this second interpretation, but
the point more generally is that because shamanism is
so ubiquitous among contemporary societies, it suggests that it
was probably also present among our ancestors. Um, SO
that's the second domain of evidence, and then the
third is kind of a more psychological approach. Shamanism
seems to really reflect and gel with our psychology,
um, and we can kind of dig into that,
but based on that, then you can also start
to argue that it probably, um, was very compelling
to our ancestors' psychology as well.
Mhm. Yes, we're going to come back to that
bit about the sort of psychological foundations of shamanism
in a bit. Uh, BUT how common is shamanism
across human societies? Is it a human universal or
anything close to a human universal?
Yeah, so it is near universal. So if we
think about hunter gatherers, there was a a study
by peoples at all, um. Yeah, I think they
missed a couple of examples, but that would suggest
it's, you know, maybe among 95% of hunter gatherers,
other societies or other studies suggest that it's uh
at a similar frequency among um non-industrialized societies. Um,
And we should recognize that by the definition that
I'm using, this would include mediums, it would include
many profits, it would include transchanneers what are often
called witch doctors, individuals who are entering these non-ordinary
states, engaging with unseen realities and providing services. So
it's, it's ubiquitous, it's near universal. There are a
couple of societies in which we don't find it,
um, but those are very interesting very often. So
some of the hunter gatherer societies that we know
lacked shamanism in recent history, we can actually infer
that they had it. Um, A couple centuries ago
and then they lost it, so groups like the
Aceh or the Siriono, these very small mobile hunter
gatherers that you find in South America, um, who
actually seem like refugees or, or like they underwent
some really catastrophic demographic collapse during which they lost
cultural complexity. Um, AND you find something similar among
other hunter gatherers. So among those hunter gatherers that
do not have shamanism, they tend to be very
small populations and we can. Infer that potentially they
had shamanism in history or um or that they're
they're just not at a large enough population size
to sustain a certain level of cultural complexity.
Uh, AND you have done work on shamanism in
different societies. Tell us, for example, about the work
you've done in, and I hope I'm pronouncing this
correctly, Siberut and the CA.
Yeah, so that is where I've done most of
my field work and most of my research. I've
been going to Siberut. Great job at the pronunciation,
um, since 2014, um. And part of the reason
that I was interested in, so Sibe is this
island, it's off the west coast of Indonesia, uh,
so it's Southeast Asia. It's actually, if you go
from Africa and you cross over the Indian Ocean,
it's, you know, arguably one of these first islands
or the first island that you'll hit. And as
a result, it actually has very good waves and
a lot of surfers like to surf around Side
so it's interesting. Um, YOU, you know, you go
there, you find anthropologists and like Australians who are,
who are going to nearby islands or going surfing.
But anyway, so yeah, I've been going to say
that since 2014. Um, AND when I arrived, so
I, I've been working with this group, the Mentawe,
they are, um, rainforest horticulturalists, so they grow palm
trees and tubers and fruit trees, and then they
hunt, and they also raise pigs and livestock. Um,
AND I got, I got there, I talked about
the experience of arriving, it was like complicated, hard,
um. But very soon after I arrived, it became
very apparent that there were certain individuals in this
society who had kind of a social magnetism. These
are individuals who were very often tattooed. They wore
loincloths that kept their hair, um, they would paint
themselves in turmeric. They had a kind of social
gravity, so, you know, they would, they would step
into a scene and you can kind of feel.
Um, FEEL the social milieu or the social environment
bend towards them, and these were the ikere, the,
the shamans of mentawe, um, and the ikere are
the nexus of political life, of medicinal life, of
religious life, um, they are understood to be distinct
from normal humans to have special eyes, to be
able to see souls, um. And they heal people
in these healing ceremonies that can go on for
several days, where they dance, they fall into trance,
um, and so just going to mental and experiencing
this institution was really striking it, it, um. Just
how prominent they were in the society and how
important it made me very curious about the institution,
but then there was also something honestly kind of
like Phantasmagorically fascinating or or or, you know, the,
the, the culture was so rich, but also so
Otherworldly. It it was just a very intriguing research
topic, so that is what really sprung me into
the world of shamanism.
So those sort of, I think we can call
them social markers, like, for example, when you mentioned
that the shamans there would um Uh, I mean,
would have tattoos, uh, and, and, and would have,
I, I think you mentioned also different kinds of
clothing. So is that something that we also see
across societies? I mean, do the shamans always have
social markers that to distinguish themselves from the other
people?
Yeah, I would say frequently, um, and some of
those can be visual, but some of those can
kind of be, we might call it. Uh, NARRATIVE
or mythological or in terms of how people understand
them. So, in mental, they are set off in
a couple of ways. They um have these tattoos,
they have the loincloths, they have the long hair,
but then they also don't, they have to taboo
themselves so they cannot eat a lot of food,
they can't have sex very often, but then they
also go through this initiation, which I write about
in the book where um There are many things
that they, that happened to them during the initiation,
but one of them is like a fundamental transformation
of their eyes. Their eyes are regularly treated, they're
treated socially, they're treated um in the secrecy of
the forest. And so it's also this understanding that
they have different kind of eyes that they have
fundamentally transformed that also sets them off, um, so,
so they're marked both in people's understandings of them,
but also aesthetically if that's clear.
Yeah. Are shamans both men and women, or is
this kind of role gendered?
Um, SO it depends on the society. Uh, MENTALITY
is interesting, um, so the word ciquere can refer
both to a man and his wife, but it's
typically the man who's kind of The shaman who
is falling into trance, who's doing these healing ceremonies.
There's a general anthropological wisdom, which I think is
counterintuitive to many people that the more egalitarian the
society, the more likely it is that men are
shamans, um, and as societies become more hierarchical, women
are more likely to become shamans, um. Um, BUT,
you know, in some societies you'll have both men
and women, but then also in some societies, shamans
will have, they'll, they'll kind of transcend the normal
gender binary. Um, THEY might have elements of both,
they might cross dress, um, so, so yeah, it,
it really depends on the, on the context. I
would say on average, they, they seem to more
often be men though, which also reflects men kind
of being more prominent, often in religious and spiritual
life.
Right. So, what are the psychological foundations of shamanism?
Is there anything specific about our psychology that predisposes
us towards shamanism and shamanic practices or what kinds
of cognitive mechanisms play a role here?
Yeah, so that's a great question. That's a big
question. Um. So an argument that I make in
the book is that shamanism recurs because it is
a hyper compelling, essentially cognitive technology, a way of
convincing people. Of assuring people of getting these simulated
experiences where people can control uncertain outcomes. And so
I, I view shamanism very much as a cognitive
or psychological technology and so I think a lot
about these psychological foundations, um. We can think about
those psychological foundations in a couple ways. One is,
um, more generally the psychological foundations of religion, of
which there has been a lot of research. I
know a lot of people have come to your
show to talk about this. So people are predisposed
to believe that agents, um, invisible agents exist and
they oversee uncertain outcomes, gods, spirits, ghosts, that they
cause illness, that they cause misfortune. Um, THEY'RE predisposed
to engage in rituals and superstitions and, and forms
of magic. So if there's an outcome I really
want to control, um, I'm very predisposed to use
a low-cost intervention to, to control it. So, and
I have a big test coming up and I
do all kinds of superstitions or, you know, a
family member is sick, I do all kinds of
superstitions. So these are very important for shamanism, but
they're also very important for for um religion more
generally, the fact that we believe that agents exist
and we use rituals or superstitions or magic to,
to engage with them. So that gets us kind
of to the basic elements of shamanism, the fact
that at its foundation shamanism is a, it's kind
of a ritualistic practice to try to control the
uncertain. But then that leaves open the question of
why does that have to look like shamanism? Why
do you have people who are dancing, falling into
trance, you know, uh having death and rebirth ceremonies,
um, why does it have to take this particular
form? And so, Uh, the thing that I argue
is most key is the intuition of transformation or
difference. So at, at the core, what a shaman
is doing is they're saying I can do something
normal humans cannot. I can speak to this God,
I can see this trend, I can, you know,
battle witches. I can engage with these, these agents,
these beings who are invisible to normal people, and
the way that I make that credible, the way
that I make that tenable is by essentially diverging
from from normal humanity by becoming a different kind
of human. And we can see a similar intuition
in superhero narratives. Like a superhero narrative is a
story about this person who can do things normal
people cannot, but the way that's made credible or
tenable for the audience is through an origin story.
They were bitten by a radioactive spider, you know,
they're an alien from another. Plant, um, whatever they
were zapped by some radioactive, whatever, um, they have
some crazy genetic mutation. All of these are narratives
to, to explain why this person differs fundamentally from
normal humans. And so I think a lot about
shamanism. Serves this function, promoting the sense that this
is a fundamentally different kind of human and thus
has abilities that as normal humans do not.
How about aspects of human sociality? Do they play
a role in any way in the development of
shamanism?
For sure, um, so, a couple that I think
are really critical and reasons that you do not
see shamanism, for example, among chimpanzees. One is, um,
shamanism requires cultural evolution or or complex culture, so
you need to be a cultural species to develop
these practices, elaborate them. Um, BUT then shamanism is
also at the end of the day a service.
It's, you go to someone, you give them resources,
they, um, provide a service in return, and so
you need to have a degree of sociality where
people can trust each other, or they can also
provide, you know, they're, they're willing to, to engage
in this kind of, uh, these kinds of service
providing. Um, SO I think those are just necessary
elements of a species to have something like shamanism.
It has to be cultural. It has to be
sufficiently cooperative. Um, BUT then shamanism also ends up
just intersecting so many domains of social life. So
in mental, shamanisms, or shamans are very important mediators.
They have political influence because they have this liminal
status because they're seen to to be special for
normal humans and to potentially have special powers that
allows them to also take on political influence.
Um, WHAT kinds of attitudes do people from industrialized
and post-industrial societies tend to have towards shamanism and
its practices?
Yeah, that's a great question. So, I would say
people's viewpoints broadly separate into two categories. One is
this view that shamanism is a kind of primeval
wisdom that um it's embodies this older spiritual relationship
or or more genuine connection to nature and to
spirituality. It is a much more edenic or rosy-eyed
view of shamanism. And you can contrast that with
a view that sees shamanism more as Superstition and
we might say it's kind of related to images
of savagery or backwardness, um, exploitation, um. Yeah, I
would say these are, these are two common stereotypes
or or paradigms, and, and they're often deployed in
ways that are uh contingent on people's political or
ideological goals. So if you want to critique post-industrial
or industrialized societies, then you'll say you can point
to shamanism and say, oh, we've lost something, you
know, there's some genuine real important. Uh, SPIRITUAL knowledge
that has, that has disappeared, but if you want
to celebrate them, you can say, oh, post-industrialized societies,
um, have rid themselves of something like shamanism. Um,
YEAH, and, and I, I, I think often stereotypes
or images of shamanism are linked to some view
that people tend to have of non-Western societies and,
and how shamanism manifests in those stories depends on
the kinds of arguments people want to make about
industrialized societies. Mhm.
But can we also find shamanism or shamanic practices
in industrialized societies?
For sure, for sure, um, and something that I
have been arguing is that I what both of
these views have in common is some fundamental separation
between Western or industrialized societies and the rest of
the world, and, and This view that has long
been a part of the study of shamanism or
or at least the popular discourse of shamanism, that
pushes shamanism to the far off, to the past.
I mean, Eliade's famous book is called um Archaic
Techniques of Ecstasy, um, uh. I, I think most
people, if you, you know, go to Google images
and you type in shamanism, it's so wrapped up
with images and imagery of, of primitiveness or or
the deep past. Um, BUT instead, I think, you
know, just as shamanism has appeared in so many
other societies that manifests in contemporary industrialized societies, um,
and it manifests in a couple ways. So one
it are are actually literal shamans. So I think
Pentecostal pastors are very often shamans. I mean, they
are, uh, channeling or or communing with a a
sky god or or some invisible being. They are
entering non-ordinary states. They're speaking in tongues, they're healing.
I mean, you can just search on YouTube, Pentecostal
healing, and if there were any other tradition, we
would very readily or easily call that shamanism. Um,
TRANSCHANNELERS or mediums that you might find, you know,
on the streets of Los Angeles or paradigmatic shamans,
um, I think many, uh, figures of Uh, the
history of Abrahamic religions or shamans. So these, I
would say are literal. Shamans, they qualify as shamans
by the definition that I describe in the book.
There are also many shaman analogs in Western and
industrialized societies, figures who are serving similar functions or
who are supported by similar social and and cognitive
foundations. Um, SO in the book I write about
what I call um Hedge wizards, so money managers
in particular, these individuals who are, uh, despite actually
being efficacious, promising some kind of insight or divinity,
uh. DIVINATORY power into unseen trends to, to provide
some people with a sense that they can control
or understand the uncertain or uncontrollable. Um, SO I
think similar dynamics are are at play in all
societies, and we often delude ourselves by denying the
universality of these practices.
So let's talk about the relationship between shamanism and
other particular kinds of religion. So, historically, the shamanism
and when organized religion starts.
Yeah, so I, I, I think there's a common
view and you find this in some of the
best contemporary books on the cultural evolution of religion,
um, or the evolution of religion. So Robert writes
the evolution of God, for instance, um, that paint
this picture or tell this story where shamanism is
this oldest religion and then it, you know, is
replaced or evolves into um. Large scale world religion.
So Robert Wright has a, has a quote in
his book where he describes shamanism as a precursor
on some evolutionary timeline that ends with eventually archbishops
and Ayatollahs, um, and, uh. In the book I
call this the Pokemon theory of shamanism. So as
a, as a child of the 90s, who played
a lot of Pokemon, um, you know, it paints
this picture where you have like this simpler primitive
evolutionary stage that then is replaced by this more
complex form. Um BUT I think that actually really
mischaracterizes how religious history very often works and instead
something that I argue is that rather, rather than
ecstatic practice or shamanism. Um, EVOLVING into these other
forms. Instead, they are actually engaged in this constant
competition and rivalry. So one thing that you actually
see in uh a lot of histories of particular
religious movements is that they will start off very
shamanic and then, um, as they become institutionalized, as
they become centralized, they attack that shamanic foundation. So
you can find this in the history of the
early Christian church. Um, THE early Christian church is
By everything we can tell a very shamanic place.
It's filled with altered states, with healing, with prophecy,
um, but within You know, a couple decades as
power is centralized in the bishops, there is an
attack against charisma, against ecstatic performance. You see this
in the history of Mormonism. Mormonism starts off again
as a religion or as a movement that is
very ecstatic, where you have speaking in tongues, you
have healing, you have divination, um, but again within
a couple decades you have key figures like Brigham
Young, Brigham Young. Who, uh, I think, I believe
is the 2nd president of the, the Church of
Latter-day Saints, um, the second prophet. Early in his
life or early in his time in Mormonism was
very enthusiastic about entering ecstatic states, about healing, about
these gifts. He felt like it was an echo
of the earliest church, but within a couple decades,
he um was not condoning it in the church.
He said that to allow people to enter these
kinds of states, um, Introduces competing doctrine, and that
is essentially why organized religion has had this complicated
relationship with shamanic practice, um. Insofar as you allow
other people to enter altered states to experience the
divine in this very direct way, it provides, uh,
or it enables competition, uh, in the connection with
the divine. If I am an archbishop, I want
to be the sole individual who can claim a
relationship to divine, to to to divinity. I want
to monopolize the ability to um Say things about
doctrine to to prophecy, and if suddenly anyone in
this community, anyone's grandma can enter trans claim that
she's, you know, channeling a spirit, then that is
threatening to my own authority.
How about uh prophets? I mean, for example, Judeo-Christian
prophets, are they shaman-like figures?
Yeah, so we can think about prophets in two
ways. One, we can think about prophets as they're
described in the um Hebrew Bible, um, and those
As far as we can tell, are very shamanic
figures. Um, THEY, uh, so, um, I actually I'm
always like less comfortable about uh just doing this
stuff from memory because there I, I want to
be very specific, um, so I just like had
some notes up, but, um, this word, so in
the Hebrew Bible, I'm probably pronouncing this incorrectly, so
forgive me for all the pronunciation, but the Hebrew
prophets are referred to with this word nabi, um,
and from what we can tell, if you look
at how Nabi is used in the Hebrew Bible,
it is very shamanic. So it's non-ordinary behavior, it
is often prophecy. Um, THERE is some implication of
a relationship with the divine. Um, HERE'S 1 Samuel
10:6, the spirit of the Lord will come powerfully
upon you and you will prophecy. So this is
a, a, a, um, derivation of the word naia.
It might be hit nabe with them and you
will be changed into a different person. So you
find this mention of a relationship with the divine,
um, this non-ordinary behavior. There's one Samuel 1924. Um,
HE stripped off his garments and he too prophesy
in Samuel's presence. He lay naked all that day
and all that night. This is why people say
Saul also among the prophets. So in the Hebrew
Bible, um, the prophets are shamans. I think it's
very hard to make the argument to the contrary,
and I think insofar as people are uncomfortable with
that, it just reflects a prejudice that puts shamanism
and shamanisms into one bucket and Abrahamic religion into
another, um, yeah. So, so, yeah, yeah, I think
early Abrahamic figures are easily qualified as shamans.
Mm, I shamanism necessarily in conflict with organized religion?
Not necessarily. So organized religion has engaged with shamanic
tendencies in different ways. So sometimes it has tried
to quash it. So again, you see this in
the early Christian church, you see this in Mormonism,
but in other contexts it tries to domesticate it.
So you can see this in the relationship between
Buddhism and shamanic practice in Japan. So in Japan,
shamans that there are shaman mediums and his historically
they were more salient. They're called iko. Um, AND
early Buddhism tried to get rid of the miko,
you know, the miko is a, a local shaman
medium. She becomes, uh, possessed and then she can
heal her divine, and of course that is that
competes with uh the Buddhistist organization's power, um, but
it was very difficult to, to get rid of
the miko. The Miko were are very important to
people, uh. People want that kind of spiritual engagement
and so what Buddhism did it it was it
weakened the Miko as much as it could, but
then it incorporated them into um Into it's uh
religious organization. So, so it, it brought them to
shrines. It, it, it kind of domesticated the practice.
So I think there is a tension, but I,
I don't think it always necessarily has to manifest
as like destroying shamanism. I think it can have
different ways of, of dealing with um the appeal
and competition that comes from shamanism.
Tell us about neo-shamanism or how shamanism can resurge
in societies where many people declare themselves as not
affiliated with any religion.
Yeah, so, um, that's a, a great comment and
that actually reminds me that when I was listing
all of the forms of shamanism in industrializing Western
societies, I just forgot neo shamanism, which, um. So
neosha is a, we might call it a trend
or a kind of new agey movement um in
which people understand themselves to be practicing, um. Older
shamanic traditions and so a common Uh, tradition within
contemporary neo-shamanism is called core shamanism. Core shamanism is
is interesting. It was started by an an anthropologist
turned essentially new age guru. This person Mike Harner
did incredible research among the sar, um, but then
he wrote this book, The Way of the shaman,
in which he argued that he was identifying some
core feature of of shamanism as it exists across
societies, created that as a a form of like
bite-sized. Um, EVERYDAY practice, and that has become very
popular, um, and What I think about the rise
of neo-shamanism, so neo-shamanism and these related practices where
people understand themselves to be engaging in shamanism have
become very, very popular in Western society. So I
think Um, in the 2021 British census, shamanism was
the fastest growing religion, um, just people who said
that they were practicing shamanism it when, I think
it multiplied by tenfold within 10 years, um. And
um they're more like self-proclaimed shamans in uh in
England and Wales than I believe there are Rastafarians
or Zoroastrians, um, but the rise, I think, is
partly related to something you gestured at, which is,
um, there has been a turn away from organized
and institutionalized religion for a number of reasons. There's
been a decline in people who affiliate with organized.
Religion, but, but that is probably compensated by people
who consider them spiritual but not religious. And I
think shamanism appeals to them, um, for a couple
of reasons. I think one, it, uh, makes them
feel like they're connecting with nature or some deep
spirituality, some more universal spirituality, and that just partly
depends on how it's packaged. But then, uh, secondarily,
I think shamanism appeals to them for the same
reason that shamanism has appealed to people everywhere that
um. Uh, THERE is something very compelling about, uh,
this more intimate relationship with divine, with the ecstatic
experience, and with using that relationship for everyday ends,
like healing and prophecy. People want, um, people want
to get something out of their relationship with the
supernatural. They want to be healed, they want to
know what's gonna happen, um, and relationships or engagements
with the supernatural that feel much more. Um, Intimate
that feel much more experiential, that feel much more
visceral, I think, are much more compelling than ones
where you have a number of intermediaries or or
a less kind of direct um spiritual experience.
So you've already given us different examples of these,
but what kinds of practices can we find in
shamanism? What kinds of rituals does it involve?
Yeah, so it's incredibly diverse, um. You have, so
some common things are aesthetic practice or self-denial. Um,
OF course, entering these non-ordinary states is very common,
but the techniques to do so are incredibly diverse.
So in how, shamans enter non-ordinary states through dancing
and through drumming, but in other places, also places
where I've worked or or visited, they will use
hallucinogens, they might um use sensory deprivation. And go
into darkness. Um, SO that's another very salient or
important dimension to it. Um, YOU often have these
dramatic initiations which we've talked about. So in Mta
again, it's like the treatment of the eyes, but
it might be a death and rebirth ceremony in
parts of Australia. It was understood that shamans would
have their bodies open and crystals would be put
inside. Um, THERE might be like a ritual burial.
Um, YES, so then they can have these very
dramatic initiations, um. Shamanism is closely linked to music,
so very, very frequently, it's, it's a a a
ubiquitous, not necessarily universal but widespread relationship between shamanic
ritual and music, um. Displays of supernatural powers or
or so like walking on fire, stabbing yourself with
swords, but also speaking languages that that you maybe
do not know.
Mhm. And what is a trends and what are
shamanic states of consciousness?
Yeah, so trans, um, again, is like a highly
debated and complicated term. The way that I think
about trans as it is common across shamanic practices,
is, um, just non-ordinary behavior, and it can manifest
in a huge diversity of ways. So in mentalwe,
when or among the mentalwe when shamans are entering
trance, they will, um, kind of shake in place,
but in other places they might be incredibly still.
Um, YOU know, it might be very violent. They
might manifest the spirits that are understood to be
embodying them. Um, ALSO the understandings of trans can
be very diverse, so it might be that their
soul is leaving their body, it might be that
a soul is coming into their body, it might
be that energy is boiling up through their body,
um. Yeah, it might be that spirits are coming
and talking to them. So the, the techniques to
induce it, the behavioral manifestations, and the general understandings
of these states are incredibly diverse, but what they
all have in common is uh a state that
is behaviorally and psychologically distinct from normal human functioning.
And what psychological effects the strengths have and what
kinds of practices produce it?
Yeah, so that um is also somewhere where I
diverge from some other people who have written about
shamanism. So some well-known writers about shamanism, people like
Michael Harner or Michael Winkelman, have argued that shamanic
trans states often share some fundamental similarities that, you
know, we can think about essentially a shamanic state
of consciousness. I think that's very hard to to
conclude, I think based on what we know about
the psychological effects of these different Techniques, these are
actually characterized by incredible diversity. So in some states,
um there might be a kind of sensory overload,
you might be hallucinating, you might be understanding yourself
to be engaging with unseen agents, traveling through worlds,
and other, there might be very, very little sensory
dynamics, um, in some, you might have a very
strong sense of self and other you might lose
your sense of self. Um. In some you might
be very aroused, and others you might might not
be aroused. Um, AND so my own work and
and review of the the literature on altered states
of consciousness has led me to conclude that um
There is very little that that is shared among
all of these traditions as they occur around the
world. And instead, instead, shamanism is kind of like
a humanity's um project of of um the explorations
of the the limitations and dimensions of consciousness. I
mean, uh, even within particular societies, shamans um entered
very different trans states. So in the book I
talk about. Um, SOME of these trans healers in
Southern Africa who ingest different herbs to induce different
states and they understand to have different effects. Some
are, um, some are kind of dream-inducing plants, some
are closer to deliriums, um, and they understand this
to be very psychologically different experiences. Mhm.
And what are the functions of trends? I mean,
tell us, for example, about the concepts of transformation
and performance.
Yeah, so there are some people who would argue,
so Michael Winkleman, is this big writer who has
written a lot about shamanism and trance, and he
has argued that trance has this integrative effect on
on cognition, that when shamans are entering trance, parts
of, you know, networks that normally are not communicating,
um, are communicating in the brain, and that allows
for insight. That means shamans are better at mediating
and problem solving. But I think it's very hard
to make a conclusion like that. I think it's
very hard to argue that shamans across societies have
um some particular psychological effect of trance just given
how incredibly diverse it is. And so the way
that I think about trance and, and what I
argue is its most important function. Is um a
sense of transformation or otherness both for the audience
but also for the specialist. Um, SO, uh, the
thing that I think is, is an issue for
shamanism. Or the hurdle that I think any specialist
needs to overcome is why do you have the
ability that you claim, you know, my mother is
sick, uh, I feel like I'm being haunted by,
by a witch. I want to know whether it
will rain tomorrow or whatever, you know, I have
some kind of goal. I go to a specialist,
I say, can you, um, can you help me
solve this, this issue? They say that they can.
Why should I believe them? Why should I think
that another human should have the powers that they
claim? Um, AND this is where I think this
fundamental transformation is necessary, you know, they become a
different kind of human, but I also think Just
the manifestation of that power should look very different.
You know, if you come to me, Ricardo, and
you're like, Munvir, can you talk to the rain
god? And I say, for sure. And I turn
and I say, hello, rain god, how are you
doing? That would not seem very credible. But if
I enter a state that looks and feels fundamentally
different from normal human functioning, I'm lying on the
ground, it's darkness, I'm shaking. That makes it much
more credible or tenable to you that I'm that
I'm, that I have the powers that I can.
And so while I think that trance does have
very important psychological effects. What I think is most
important about it is that it's creating a very
credible Seeming experience for both audience and for for
practitioner. It is compelling to everyone involved that this
person has some ability that normal humans do not.
They have some experience that normal humans do not.
When it comes to rituals, what are initiations, how
do they play out and what are their goals?
Yeah, so, um. Initiations, I think, are doing a
couple of things, so. They might be a mechanism
for providing a novice with information that they don't
have, so teaching them, providing them with knowledge, um,
they might be a mechanism for creating common knowledge,
just that someone is shifting from one state to
another, you know, there's a very clear marker, you
know, now you put on a particular hat, you're
given a particular name, and now we know that
you've transitioned from one state to another. But then
again, What I think is so critical about shamanism
is this fundamental transformation, and I think a lot
of initiations are doing a lot to, to reinforce
that sense. They are um telling us that this
is no longer a regular human, that Ricardo is
no longer like the rest of us, that he
has, his body has transformed, his eyes have transformed.
Um, IN alwe, or among the mental when a
person is going from Um, a regular person to
a shaman, so they, they have these, these various
rituals in which their eyes are transformed. They have
various nights of, of trance dancing. They are understood
to meet their ancestors for the first time. But
then the terminology used to describe them also changes.
So the mentalwe referred to. Um, NON-SHAMANS as simmaa,
a word that is also used to refer to
uncooked food or uh food that is not yet
ripe, whereas they refer to shamans as ciquere, and
there's this sense, this intuition that the initiation ripens
you. It transforms you, it cooks you, that there
is this, this transformation of your fundamental being, so
that you have these special abilities, and that I
think is very critical to a lot of shamanic
initiation.
So you've already mentioned some of these, but what
kinds of social roles do shamans play in their
societies?
Foremost is roles like healing and divination, but then
very often uh they will take on secondary leadership
roles. They might be mediators, arbitrators, um, they might
have some political influence, um. They may, uh, they
may have important roles in ceremonial life and, and,
um, life cycle transitions, so they might oversee initiations.
Um, I would say really, really critical though is
of course just uh as healers, diviners, you know,
essentially providing these kind of miraculous services to everyday
people, and then the other roles that they often
have are implications of these these central functions.
Do people believe in everything a shaman does and
if not, and if there are some cognitive contradictions,
what does that tell us about shamanism and how
people relate to it?
Yeah, so people do not believe everything. Um, IN
fact, in most societies, you will find a lot
of discourse about who is real, who is not
real, um, you know, is this person faking trans,
um, there is also sometimes articulated a skepticism about,
um, the reality of much of shamanism, so. I,
I think it's very easy to, to stand outside
of a particular context and just treat everyone as
undying believers, but in fact something that I've been
really struck by throughout my research just on the
evolution of religion is how much more cognitively sophisticated,
skeptical, um. Discerning people are, um. And so I
think there are a couple important dimensions to that.
One, so I think this the entire experience of
writing this book and and thinking about shamanism and
religion more generally has made me think about belief
in a different way. I, I, I think it's
easy to come from a, a tradition, a Western
tradition, which is the scholarly tradition that I work
with and that has been very influenced by The,
the Christian discourse where belief is believed to be
fundamental. So I act a particular way because of
my beliefs. Um, I respond to the world in
a particular way because of my beliefs. But my,
my research on shamanism has made me start to
think about how our responses to the world and
our beliefs about the world are, are sometimes at
odds. So I might engage in magic or superstition,
but also be skeptical or not sure of whether
it works. I might go to a A shamanic
initiation or ritual. I might uh be healed. I
might have mixed expectations or or a half belief
in whether it works, but that actually doesn't necessarily
Uh, change the fact that I might still therapeutically
respond to it, um. So, Yeah, I, I, this
entire project has made me think that belief is
maybe less critical than we are sometimes apt to,
to, to believe ourselves.
And the shamanism actually work. Yeah, and if so,
what it is in shamanism that specifically makes it
work.
Yeah, so I'm an, I'm a materialist. I'm an
empiricist, um, and so do I think that shamans
are engaging with unseen beings and providing services through
that engagement? Do I think that, you know, the
shaman is talking to a crocodile god or a
sky god? Based on the current evidence, uh, I,
I don't think we can necessarily conclude that, and
I, and I present evidence. I, I, I try
to treat that position with respect, but I, I
think based on our, our existing evidence, we can
conclude that. Do we think that shamans are sometimes
therapeutically healing people, or do I think they're providing
therapeutic benefits? When I started This work I, I,
and in earlier periods, I was much more skeptical.
I thought uh there are some people who are
so enthusiastic about saying that shamans are healers and
they provide these therapeutic benefits, and I felt that
they were often doing so more from a desire
for what shamanism should be than from a, a
serious and responsible engagement with You know, the empirical
evidence. After having written this book, after studying it
a lot, I am much more convinced that shamanism
sometimes has therapeutic effects, or it has the capacity
to provide therapeutic effects, um, and I think about
that through several different mechanisms. One, I think shamanism
is a really potent or powerful way to change
a person's understanding of themselves, um, and this is
what psychotherapy is often doing. And maybe more familiar
Western context, but a patient goes into a shamanic
killing ceremony with some story or some expectation about
themselves, and then the shamanic ceremony is this powerful,
very vivid way of transforming that story. I'm haunted
by witches or the crocodile spirit is here to
get me. I have this very powerful experience. The
shaman battles them, it removes them from my house,
it puts them in the river, and I come
away with a different story. Oh, I'm, I'm not
haunted anymore. Um, AND in the book, I, I
actually talked to. A well-known psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins,
who calls himself a shaman because he understands his
role in precisely this way. He has to dress
himself in um signals of authority enact a powerful
transformation so that the patient's story about themselves changes.
Um, SO that is one thing that I think
shamanism is doing in many cases. Uh, ANOTHER is
that I think it is a potent. Um, WAY
to induce the placebo effect and The experience of
writing that book and, and studying shamanic healing ceremonies
also, I think reinforced for me that um it
induces, it can induce the placebo effect even in
the absence of whether people do or do not
believe in it. People can come, but it is
the experience of being healed that seems to often
just lead to to reduced pain or or uh
anxiety. Regardless of belief, and I think that's, that's
a very interesting topic about how are, how is
the placebo effect being induced even in the absence
of belief. Um, THE final thing that I think
is often very important for shamanic healing ceremonies is
that they are incredibly very often social celebratory festive
events. So coming from a western context, I think
I had expected healing often to be something that's
much more somber and much more sober, and was
struck. When with the mentalwe, um, and finding that
a ceremony would essentially become a party. It would,
you know, the shamans would come, they would heal
a person, animals would be sacrificed, um, then we're
feasting, then the shamans would dance, but at some
point they would stop dancing, and then other people
would stay up dancing, and everyone would try to
stay up all night and everyone, um, all the
friends and the family are there. Observing these healing
ceremonies, um, I was very struck by the fact
that they were often much more festive and celebratory
than I had expected. Mhm. Right. Mhm.
But when it comes to healing specifically, could it
be that at least part of the effects are
placebo effects?
Yeah, so I think there are good reasons to
actually suspect that. SHAMANIC healing ceremonies are inducing the
placebo effect. And in fact, I think shamanic healing
ceremonies are very well geared or very well designed
to induce the placebo effect, and there are two
mechanisms that I would want to highlight. The first
is just how sensory or visceral or engrossing the
experiences. So there's research showing that. Um, SHAM surgery
induces a stronger placebo effect than giving someone a
sugar pill or doing some massage. Um, AND if
you think about shamanic healing ceremonies, they are incredibly
engrossing, you know, it's a practitioner who is fighting
a spirit at night, there's fire, there's music, there's
dancing, there's trance. um, IT is a much more
sensorially, um, vivid experience and so for that reason
we would expect a hunger placebo effect. The second
reason is that research has shown that people have
a stronger placebo effect when they feel that a
practitioner cares about them more, when that practitioner is
um more empathic, when they just have a more
intimate relationship with them. Um, AND shamanism, uh, I
think is that for two reasons, when you're surrounded
by friends and family, but then secondarily you have
someone who's coming out, um, and not only healing
you but often doing so in ways that are
understood to be risky for them. So, um, the,
uh, the these uh Kalahari hunter gatherers. Um, TRANCE
was called half death. It was understood that this
person was, was approaching death in many contexts, shamans
are fighting for the patients. It feels like the
entire community is fighting for them, and I think,
so both of these, um, we should expect to
produce a stronger therapeutic effect through the placebo effect.
OK, so for the last part of our conversation,
we have to talk a little bit about psychedelics
here, not just because they have recently sort of
gone mainstream, but also because people tend to make
some claims about, some claims about their use in
traditional society. So what are psychedelics and why do
people link them to shamanism?
So, when people talk about psychedelics, I think they
tend to talk about them in two ways. Some
people use the word psychedelic to just refer to
hallucinogens more generally, but then many people are are
using the word psychedelic to refer to a particular
kind of substance or compound. It's um. You know,
drugs that um have an effect on the serotonin,
um HT2A receptor. Ricardo, I wanna make sure that
that's correct. Um,
OK, no problem.
So allergic, psychedelic. 5 HT 5 HT 2A. OK.
Can we do that question again?
Mhm. Yes, uh, I will repeat the question. Uh,
OK, so for the last part of our conversation,
we have to talk here a little bit about
psychedelics, not just because they have recently sort of
gone mainstream, but also because many people uh make
claims about their use in traditional society. So what
are psychedelics and why is it that people tend
to link them to shamans?
That's a great question. So when people are talking
about psychedelics, they tend to use that term in
one of two ways. First is to refer to
hallucinogens more broadly. Um, SOME people might even call
marijuana a psychedelic under that use, um, but then
when many people are talking about psychedelics, they're talking
about compounds with a specific, um, neurological effect, these
that are acting on the serotonin uh 5HT2A receptors.
Um, AND so these are compounds like LSD, psilocybin.
Um, SILICIN 5Mo DMT, DMT biotinine, um. And so
as the serotonergic psychedelics have become more popular, you
often find this claim that psychedelics have been used
in shamanic contexts around the world and for millennia.
Um, AND I think part of the reason you
find this claim so often is that it softens
the edge around something that has otherwise. That otherwise
might seem a little scary. Oh, we should legalize
this, or we should, you should feel more comfortable
about it being in clinical context, because this has
been a part of human spiritual life about human
medicinal life, about human ritual and therapeutic life for
millennia and in cultures around the world. Um, AND
in fact when I often when I talk to
people about shamanism or about my fieldwork, they not
only uh expect that the mentalwe use drugs or
hallucinogens, but they might even in particular expect them
to use psychedelics. And for the context, mental shamans
do not use uh psychoactive substances to induce trance.
I mean they smoke tobacco like many people in
that society, the way that they enter trance is
through dancing and drumming. Um, SO I think this
claim is made very widely in the popular discourse
that psychedelics have been used in shamanic context for
millennia. Um, BUT I think it's inaccurate, or, or
at least I think it, it really misrepresents human
history and diversity, and I can talk a bit
about why.
Mhm. Yeah, yeah, tell us about why then.
Um, SO I think it misrepresents human diversity and
history in a couple ways. The first is, what
is the actual evidence that people around the world
have used psychedelics and The best work for this
or the best attempt to to answer this question
was done by a French PhD student, Martin Fortier.
So, Martin went through the diaries of explorers and
adventurers. He went through old ethnographic documentation, he went
through ethnobotanical work. He was building this incredible project.
Unfortunately, he died while he was working on the
project, really tragically, he was 30 years old, he
died of cancer, um, but he presented some of
his findings before he had passed, and so we
should treat these as preliminary, but as best as
he could tell, serotonergic psychedelics have only been used.
In mezzo in South America, nowhere else in the
world do we have reliable evidence. So observational evidence
or um ethnobotanical evidence of the hallucinogenic use of
serotonergic psychedelics. It's only in Mesoamerican and South America
and even in those regions, it seems to have
been used by a a a very small number.
OF cultures. So he estimates that I think 5%
of ethnolinguistic groups in the Americas were using serotonergic
psychedelics and hallucinogenic doses. And so on a global
scale, that would be something like 1% of, of
ethnolinguistic groups. So a tiny slice of humanity has
used these particular kinds of compounds. Then there's also
the question of um how they have been used.
And so I think often the discourse wants to
draw a parallel between modern therapeutic or clinical applications
and what is understood to be indigenous use. There
is this image that the shaman is presenting a
psychedelic to the patient, and that they are consuming
it, and that is somehow related to psychological healing.
In fact, the prevailing way that psychedelics were used
in these contexts is that the shaman themselves, the
specialist, would consume the substance and, and they would
um consume the substance as a way of Accessing
supernatural powers as a way of divining, as a
way of battling enemies, as a way of diagnosing
illness. Um, THERE'S a really striking video that Napoleon
Chagnon took among the Yanomami, where they had uh
taken a psychedelic snuff, um, and then used that
to attack babies as they understood it in an
enemy group. So the usage that is often Described
in the popular psychedelic discourse is very different than
what you see in the societies that they're claiming
to represent, um. And I should point out that
it's not only that shamans are taking it, you
also have, you have an incredible diversity of uses
of, of psychedelic substances. You have apprenticeships, you have
situations where everyone, all of the men are taking
it together for all night dances. You have it
where many individuals are taking it um for some
shared supernatural or spiritual experience, you know, they might
understand themselves to be traveling beyond the Milky Way.
But it's all nevertheless very, very different than it
is often described in the popular psychedelic literature.
So, uh, just one last question about that. Why
do you think that people in industrialized societies come
up with these claims?
Like I said, I think it's about making psychedelics
seem More approachable. And for the record, I have
no problem with um making reasoned arguments and drawing
on data. To show why there should be broader
acceptance of psychedelics or, you know, why clinical trials
might suggest psychedelics are useful for therapeutic or clinical
purposes. Um, BUT I think when people start to
imagine or make up claims about human cultural diversity
to support these, these monetary or ideological goals, I
think that is very irresponsible. I think it projects
this very simplistic image onto human cultural diversity. Mangles
it in service of the kinds of goals that
people are having, um, and I think it does
a disservice to uh the project more generally of,
of having a better understanding or or better characterizing
how people have used drugs across human societies, um.
Yeah. Great. So the book is again Shamanism, the
Timeless Religion. Of course, I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And apart
from the book, where can people find your work
on the internet?
So they can find it on my website, Manvier.org,
M A N V I R.org. I also have
a Twitter um or sorry, I guess it's, I
have an X account M and VR SNG H
and I have a blue sky um manvier, I
think it's dot, you know, blue sky.social, the, the
standard um format and yeah.
OK, great. So I will also add that to
the description. And thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
always a great pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you for having me, Ricardo. I, I always
enjoy it and I enjoy your show more generally.
I think you're doing an amazing thing. I, I
like to work out while listening to your podcast
or watching your show so that I can learn
something fascinating about, you know, any topic.
Well, thank you. Hi guys, thank you for watching
this interview until the end. If you liked it,
please share it, leave a like and hit the
subscription button. The show is brought to you by
Nights Learning and Development done differently, check their website
at Nights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or PayPal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and PayPal supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo,
Bernard Seyche Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna
Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika Lennie, John Connors, Philip For
Connolly. Then the meter Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs
called Holbrookfield governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti
Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent
and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel,
Sardus France David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach
Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn
Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John
Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry,
Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fishtim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.